#Chana Masala

It’s so challenging and tiring and I constantly have to manage my expectations before we ever get there, and especially when we arrive (like when we show up in Croatia and it’s cold and windy and loud and I got sick).

That sounded negative. But no, it’s honesty. If you haven’t noticed, even though traveling is hard sometimes, we still love it, travel often, and we’re thankful for the opportunity to do so. In fact, we’re hopeful to spend more time traveling this year and I cannot wait.

Despite its challenges, traveling does one big thing for me: It inspires. Pretty much every meal we sit down to is an opportunity to learn about a new culture. How wonderful.

Easy Chana Masala! 1 Pot, incredibly flavorful, SO healthy! #vegan #glutenfree #plantbased #healthy #recipe #chanamasala

This recipe was inspired by a meal we stumbled upon in Oslo, Norway. Despite it being quite cold and windy and the shops being closed because it was a Sunday (manage expectations, Dana, manage expectations…), we found this amazing Indian restaurant where I enjoyed one of the best meals I’ve ever had.

Yes, big claims! And it’s all because of their chana masala (and mango chutney…oh my word).

Easy Chana Masala! 1 Pot, incredibly flavorful, SO healthy! #vegan #glutenfree #plantbased #healthy #recipe

Chana masala is traditionally based with green chilies, onion, garlic, fresh cilantro, a blend of spices, chickpeas, and tomatoes. It can be prepared a number of different ways, but I chose the simple route: 1 pot and about 30 minutes required.

AMAZING Chana Masala made in 1 Pot! So healthy, flavorful and delicious! #vegan #glutenfree #chanamasala #recipe

It starts with onion and cumin. Next comes a paste of green chilis, ginger, garlic, and fresh cilantro. The bulk of the flavor comes from coriander, chili powder, and ground turmeric. Chickpeas add plenty of fiber, texture, and protein, and puréed tomatoes add body and richness.

The magical step that takes this dish from love it to GIVE ME ALL OF THAT RIGHT NOW is the garam masala (I include a simple DIY blend below), and fresh lemon juice.

AMAZING Chana Masala made in 1 Pot! So healthy, flavorful and delicious! #vegan #glutenfree #chanamasala #recipe #indian

The result is a thick, stew-like curry that’s extremely flavorful, easy to make, not overly spicy, and the perfect hearty plant-based meal.

Enjoy this dish on its own, over rice, cauliflower rice, or – my personal favorite – over roasted sweet potatoes and broccoli (easy recipe below). I know, it sounds weird, but it’s SO good, and another way to get more plants into your diet.

If you try this dish, let us know what you think! Leave a comment, rate it, and take a picture and tag it #minimalistbaker on Instagram so we can see all your beautiful creations. Cheers, friends!

AMAZING Chana Masala made in 1 Pot! So healthy, flavorful and delicious! #vegan #glutenfree #chanamasala #recipe #easy
4.9 from 53 reviews
Easy Chana Masala
 
Print Friendly Version
Prep time
5 mins
Cook time
25 mins
Total time
30 mins
 
30 minute, 1-pot chana masala with green chili, cilantro, and garam masala. Easy to make, extremely flavorful, and satisfying. A healthy, plant-based meal.
Author: Minimalist Baker
Recipe type: Entree
Cuisine: Indian, Vegan, Gluten Free
Serves: 6
Ingredients

    3 Tbsp (45 ml) grape seed oil (or sub coconut oil)
    1 white or yellow onion, finely diced (110 g)
    1 Tbsp (7 g) ground cumin
    3/4 tsp sea salt, divided, plus more to taste
    6 cloves garlic, minced (3 Tbsp or 16 g)
    2 Tbsp (12 g) fresh ginger, minced
    1/2 cup (30 g) fresh cilantro, chopped
    2-3 fresh green chilies, sliced with seeds (I used serrano peppers)
    1 Tbsp (7 g) ground coriander
    1 tsp chili powder
    1 tsp ground turmeric
    1 28-oz can pureed or finely diced tomatoes (if unsalted, you’ll add more salt to the dish)
    2 15-ounce (425 g) cans chickpeas, slightly drained
    1 tsp garam masala* (see instructions for DIY blend)
    2-3 tsp coconut sugar
    2 Tbsp (30 ml) lemon juice, plus more to taste

Instructions

    Heat a large pot over medium heat. Once hot, add oil, onion, cumin, and 1/4 tsp salt.
    Add garlic, ginger, cilantro, and green chilies to a mortar and pestle and grind into a rough paste (or use a small food processor to pulse into a paste. Alternatively, just finely mince.) Then, add to the pan with the onions.
    Next add ground coriander, chili powder, and turmeric and stir to coat. Add a little more oil at this point if the pan is looking dry.
    Next add pureed tomatoes and chickpeas and remaining 1/2 tsp salt. If the mixture looks a little too thick, add up to 1 cup (240 ml) water (I added ~1/2 cup (120 ml)). You’re looking for a semi-thick soup consistency at this point, as it will cook down into more of a stew.
    Increase heat to medium high until it reaches a rolling simmer, then reduce heat to low or medium-low and maintain a simmer (uncovered) for 15-20 minutes, or until thick and stew-like. Stir occasionally.
    In the meantime, if you don’t have garam masala seasoning, make your own by adding 2 small dried red chilies, 1 tsp black peppercorns (or 1/2 tsp ground black pepper), 1 tsp cumin seeds (or 1/2 tsp ground cumin), 1 tsp cardamom pods (or 1/2 tsp ground cardamom), 1/2 tsp cloves (or 1/4 tsp ground cloves), and 1/8 tsp nutmeg to a mortar and pestle or spice grinder and grind/mix into a powder. Set aside.
    When the chana masala is thickened and bubbly, taste and adjust seasonings as needed, adding more salt for saltiness, chili powder for heat, or a bit of coconut sugar for sweetness and to offset the heat of the chilies.
    Remove from heat and add lemon juice and garam masala. Stir to mix, then let cool slightly before serving. Fresh cilantro and lemon juice make an excellent garnish. Chana masala can be enjoyed as a stew on its own, or it can be delicious with white or brown rice (see my favorite method here), or cauliflower rice. Lastly, my favorite is over roasted sweet potatoes and broccoli (see notes for instructions).
    Leftovers will keep covered in the refrigerator up to 4 days, or in the freezer up to 1 month.


Nutrition Information
Serving size: 1/6th of recipe (without toppings or sides) Calories: 275 Fat: 8.5 g Saturated fat: 0.6 g Carbohydrates: 41.1 g Sugar: 14.8 g Sodium: 496 mg Fiber: 5.3 g Protein: 9 g 